[Docs] ES UI form library (#78654)
elastic/kibana: src/plugins/es_ui_shared/docs/docs/form_lib/core/use_form_hook.md

---
id: use_form_hook
title: useForm()
sidebar_label: useForm()
---

**Returns:** [`FormHook`](form_hook.md)

Use the `useForm` hook to declare a new form object. As we have seen in the ["Getting started"](about.md), you can use it without any additional configuration. It does accept an optional `config` object with the following configuration (all parameters are optionals).

## Configuration

### onSubmit(data, isValid)

**Arguments:** `data: T, isValid: boolean`  
**Returns:** `Promise<void>`

The `onSubmit` handler is executed when calling `form.submit()`. It receives the form data and a boolean for the validity of the form.

> Meanwhile the form is being submitted, the form `isSubmitting` state will be set to `true`. This can be useful to change the state of the submit button in the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the form is submitted `isSubmitting` will be set to `true` then back to `false` after the `onSubmit` handler has run. This can be useful to change the state of the submit button in the UI.
```

```js
interface MyFormData {
  name: string;
}

const onFormSubmit = async (data: MyFormData, isValid: boolean): Promise<void> => {
    // "form.isSubmitting" is set to "true"

    if (!isValid) {
      // Maybe show a callout
      return;
    }
    // Do anything with the data
    await myApiService.createResource(data);

    // "form.isSubmitting" is set to "false".
}
const { form } = useForm<MyFormData>({ onSubmit: onFormSubmit });

// JSX

> <button onClick{form.submit}>Send form</button>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<button disabled={form.isSubmitting} onClick{form.submit}>Send form</button>
```

```js
interface MyForm {
  user: {
    firstName: string;
    lastName: string;
  }
}

const schema: Schema<MyForm> {
  user: {
    firstName: {
      defaultValue: '',
      ... // other config
    },
    lastName: {
      defaultValue: '',
      ...
    },
    isAdmin: {
      defaultValue: false,
    }
  }
};

export const MyComponent = () => {
  const { form } = useForm<MyForm>({ schema });

  // No need to provide the "config" prop on each field,
  // it will be read from the schema
  return (
    <Form form={form}>
      <UseField path="user.firstName" />
      <UseField path="user.lastName" />
      <UseField path="user.isAdmin" />
    </Form>
  );
}
```

### deserializer

When you provide a `defaultValue` to the form, you might want to parse the object and modify it (e.g. add an extra field just for the UI). You would use a `deserializer` to do that. This handler receives the `defaultValue` provided and return a new object with updated fields default values ([read more about the "In" state here](in_out_raw_state.md#in-data-state)).  
**Note:** It is recommended to keep this pure function _outside_ your component and not declare it inline on the hook.  

```js

> import { Form, useForm, useFormData, Field, FIELD_TYPES, FormDataProvider } from '<es_ui_shared>/public';

Reviewer 2: Good point 👍

// Data coming from the server
const fetchedData = {
  name: 'John',
  address: {
    street: 'El Camino Real #350'
  }
}

// We want to have a toggle in the UI to display the address _if_ there is one.
// Otherwise the toggle value is "false" and no address is displayed.
const deserializer = (defaultValue) => {
  return {
    ...defaultValue,
    // We add an extra toggle field
    showAddress:  defaultValue.hasOwnProperty('address'),
  };
}

export const MyComponent = ({ fetchedData }: Props) => {
  const { form } = useForm({
    defaultValue: fetchedData,
    deserializer
  });
  const [{ showAddress }] = useFormData({ form, watch: 'showAddress' });

  // We can now use our "showAddress" internal field in the UI
  return (
    <Form form={form}>

>       <UseField path="name" config={{ type: FieldType:Text }} component={Field} />

Reviewer 3: Should this be `type: FIELD_TYPES.TEXT`?

If we run the example above for the `deserializer`, and we click on the "Submit" button, we would get this in the console

```
Form data: {
  address: {
    street: 'El Camino Real #350'
  },
  name: 'John',
  showAddress: true
}
```

We don't want to surface the internal `showAddress` field. Let's use a `serializer` to remove it.

```js

const deserializer = (value) => {
  ...
};

  // Remove the showAddress field from the outputted data
const serializer = (value) => {
  const { showAddress, ...rest } = value;
  return rest;
}

export const MyComponent = ({ fetchedData }: Props) => {
  const { form } = useForm({
    defaultValue: fetchedData,
    deserializer,
    serializer,
  });

  ...

};
```

Much better, now when we submit the form, the internal fields are not leaked outside when building the form object.

### id

**Type:** `string`

You can optionally give an id to the form, that will be attached to the `form` object you receive. This can be useful for debugging purpose when you have multiple forms on the page.

### options

**Type:** `{ valueChangeDebounceTime?: number; stripEmptyFields?: boolean }`

#### valueChangeDebounceTime

**Type:** `number` (ms)
**Default:** 500

> When a field value changes, for example when we hit a key inside a text field, its `isChangingValue` state is set to `true`. Then, after all the validations have run for the field, the `isChangingValue` state is back to `false`. The time it take between those two state change entirely depend on the time it take to run the validations. If the validations are all synchronous, the time will be `0`. If there are some asynchronous validations, (e.g. making an HTTP request to validate the value on the server), the "value change" duration will be the time it takes to run all the async validations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a field value changes, for example when we hit a key inside a text field, its `isChangingValue` state is set to `true`. Then, after all the validations have run for the field, the `isChangingValue` state is back to `false`. The time it take between those two state changes entirely depends on the time it takes to run the validations. If the validations are all synchronous, the time will be `0`. If there are some asynchronous validations, (e.g. making an HTTP request to validate the value on the server), the "value change" duration will be the time it takes to run all the async validations.
```
